# Developer Notes

## Python's Init File

I've chosen to export some frequently used classes in [`__init__.py`](src/apologies/__init__.py) to
flatten the namespace and make the library more approachable.  This isn't something
I've done before, but I noticed this pattern being followed in some other libraries
and it seemed to be worthwhile.  This [article](https://towardsdatascience.com/whats-init-for-me-d70a312da583) was
helpful in understanding the options and common practices.  Unfortunately, Sphinx
does not do a good job of documenting the init file, so this doesn't really simplify
things for users as much as I had hoped.

## Supported Platforms

The included demo does not run on Windows, because it needs the UNIX-only
curses library for screen drawing.  However, the rest of the code does work
basically the same no matter where you run it.

## Development Environment

My primary development environment when writing this code was IntelliJ Ultimate
on MacOS.  I also tested regularly in my Debian Linux development environment.
I've since moved (mostly against my will) to a Windows development environment for
day-to-day work, so I've also gone through the effort to support that platform.
On Windows, I have typically been using PyCharm rather than IntelliJ.

## Installing this Package Elsewhere

Normally, you would install a packaged version 
from [PyPI](https://pypi.org/project/apologies/).  However, if you've made
changes that aren't published, and you want to use them locally, then the
easiest thing to do is build the wheel package and install it in your
virtualenv:

```
$ poetry build
$ source /path/to/bin/activate
$ pip install --force /path/to/repos/apologies/dist/apologies-0.1.11-py3-none-any.whl
```

You may need to do some manual cleanup later once the package is officially published.

## Packaging and Dependencies

This project uses [Poetry](https://python-poetry.org/) to manage Python packaging and dependencies.  Most day-to-day tasks (such as running unit tests from the command line) are orchestrated through Poetry.  

A coding standard is enforced using [Black](https://github.com/psf/black), [isort](https://pypi.org/project/isort/) and [Pylint](https://www.pylint.org/).  Python 3 type hinting is validated using [MyPy](https://pypi.org/project/mypy/).  To reduce boilerplate, classes are defined using [Attrs](https://www.attrs.org/) (see this [rationale](https://glyph.twistedmatrix.com/2016/08/attrs.html)).

## Pre-Commit Hooks

We rely on pre-commit hooks to ensure that the code is properly-formatted,
clean, and type-safe when it's checked in.  The `run install` step described
below installs the project pre-commit hooks into your repository.  These hooks
are configured in [`.pre-commit-config.yaml`](.pre-commit-config.yaml).

If necessary, you can temporarily disable a hook using Git's `--no-verify`
switch.  However, keep in mind that the CI build on GitHub enforces these
checks, so the build will fail.

## Line Endings

The [`.gitattributes`](.gitattributes) file controls line endings for the files
in this repository.  It would be simplest to have files in the Git working copy
use native line endings.  However, I develop this code on multiple platforms,
and the files in the published PyPI package get the line endings from the
working copy.  If we use native line endings, the format of the published
package will vary depending on where the publish step was run.  This is
confusing, and can cause problems for downstream users who expect the PyPI
package to have a consistent format.  Instead of relying on automatic behavior,
the `.gitattributes` file forces most files to have UNIX line endings.  

This generally works ok, except for the [`docs/requirements.txt`](docs/requirements.txt) file 
generated by Poetry.  Unfortunately, all of the files that Poetry generates
have native platform line endings, and you can't override that behavior.  Even
with sane configuration in `.gitattributes`, you sometimes still get spurious
differences, where Git says that a file has changed but then `git diff` shows
an empty result.  The `run` script and the pre-commit hooks both normalize the
line endings for `requirements.txt` using [`dos2unix.py`](dos2unix.py).  I wish
there were a standard way to do this in Poetry or in Python, but there isn't as
of this writing.

## Prerequisites

Nearly all prerequisites are managed by Poetry.  All you need to do is make
sure that you have a working Python 3 enviroment and install Poetry itself.  

### MacOS

On MacOS, it's easiest to use [Homebrew](https://brew.sh/):

```
$ brew install python3
$ brew install poetry
```

When you're done, you probably want to set up your profile so the `python` on
your `$PATH` is Python 3 from Homebrew (in `/usr/local`).  By default, you'll
get the standard Python 2 that comes with MacOS.

### Debian

First, install Python 3 and related tools:

```
$ sudo apt-get install python3 python3-venv python3-pip
```

Once that's done, make sure Python 3 is the default on your system.  There are
a couple of ways to do this, but using `update-alternatives` as discussed 
on [StackOverflow](https://unix.stackexchange.com/a/410851) is probably 
the best.

Then, install Poetry in your home directory:

```
$ curl -sSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/python-poetry/poetry/master/get-poetry.py | python
```

### Windows

First, install Python 3 from your preferred source, either a standard
installer or a meta-installer like Chocolatey.  Then, install Poetry
in your home directory:

```
$ curl -sSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/python-poetry/poetry/master/get-poetry.py | python
```

The development environment (with the `run` script, etc.) expects a bash shell
to be available.  It works fine with the standard Git bash.

## Configure Poetry's Python Interpreter

At this point, you can either let Poetry use its defaults, or tell it explicity
which Python interpreter you want it to use.  On MacOS anyway, Poetry >= v1.1.3
seems to be quite aggressive about using the most recent version of Python
available on my system (even if it's not on my `$PATH`), which is not always
what I want.

To force Poetry to use a particular version of Python on the `$PATH`, do this:

```
$ poetry env use 3.8
```

To force Poetry to use a version that isn't on the `$PATH`, you can't just use
the version number as shown above.  You have to provide the whole path:

```
$ poetry env use /usr/local/Cellar/python@3.9/3.9.0/bin/python3.9
```

You can check the version that is in use with:

```
$ poetry env info
```

If you switch between versions, it is a good idea to sanity check what is
actually being used.  I've noticed that if I start on 3.8 and then switch to
3.9 (in the order shown above), then `python env info` still reports Python
3.8.6 when I'm done.  The fix seems to be to remove the virutalenvs and start
over:

```
$ poetry env list
$ poetry env remove <item>
```

For more background, see [this discussion](https://github.com/python-poetry/poetry/issues/522) and also [Poetry PR #731](https://github.com/python-poetry/poetry/pull/731).

## Activating the Virtual Environment

Poetry manages the virtual environment used for testing.  Theoretically, the
Poetry `shell` command gives you a shell using that virtualenv.  However, it
doesn't work that well.  Instead, it's simpler to just activate the virtual
environment directly.  The [`run`](run) script has an entry that dumps out the
correct `source` command. Otherwise, see [`notes/venv.sh`](notes/venv.sh) for a way
to set up a global alias that activates any virtualenv found in the current
directory.

## Developer Tasks

The [`run`](run) script provides shortcuts for common developer tasks:

```
$ run --help

------------------------------------
Shortcuts for common developer tasks
------------------------------------

Usage: run <command>

- run install: Setup the virtualenv via Poetry and install pre-commit hooks
- run activate: Print command needed to activate the Poetry virtualenv
- run requirements: Regenerate the docs/requirements.txt file
- run format: Run the code formatters
- run checks: Run the PyLint and MyPy code checkers
- run test: Run the unit tests
- run test -c: Run the unit tests with coverage
- run test -ch: Run the unit tests with coverage and open the HTML report
- run docs: Build the Spinx documentation for apologies.readthedocs.io
- run docs -o: Build the Spinx documentation and open in a browser
- run tox: Run the broader Tox test suite used by the GitHub CI action
- run release: Release a specific version and tag the code
- run publish: Publish the current code to PyPI and push to GitHub
- run demo: Run a game with simulated players, displaying output on the terminal
- run sim: Run a simulation to see how well different character input sources behave
```

## Integration with IntelliJ or PyCharm

I have used both PyCharm and IntelliJ Ultimate (with the Python plugin
installed).  These two IDEs are basically equivalent except for the location of some
configuration.  By integrating Black and Pylint, most everything important that
can be done from a shell environment can also be done right in IntelliJ or PyCharm.

Unfortunately, it is somewhat difficult to provide a working IntelliJ or
PyCharm configuration that other developers can simply import. There are still
some manual steps required.  I have checked in a minimal `.idea` directory, so
at least all developers can share a single inspection profile, etc.

### Prerequisites

Before going any further, make sure sure that you installed all of the system
prerequisites discussed above.  Then, make sure your environment is in working
order.  In particular, if you do not run the install step, there will be no
virtualenv for IntelliJ to use:

```
$ run install
$ run test
$ run checks
```

Once you have a working shell development environment, **Open** (do not
**Import**) the `apologies` directory in IntelliJ and follow the remaining
instructions below.  (By using **Open**, the existing `.idea` directory will be
retained.)  

> _Note:_ If you get a **Frameworks Detected** message, ignore it for now,
> because IntelliJ might be trying to import some things which aren't really part
> of the project.

### Plugins

If you are using IntelliJ rather than PyCharm, install the following plugins:

|Plugin|Description|
|------|-----------|
|[Python](https://plugins.jetbrains.com/plugin/631-python)|Smart editing for Python code|

### Project and Module Setup

Run the following to find the location of the Python virtualenv managed by
Poetry:

```
$ poetry run which python
```

> _Note:_ On Windows, remember that Git Bash is is going to give you the translated
> UNIX-like path.  Work backwards to find the real Windows path.

#### PyCharm

Go to settings and find the `apologies` project.  Under **Python Interpreter**,
select the Python virtualenv from above.  

Under **Project Structure**, mark both `src` and `tests` as source folders.  In the
**Exclude Files** box, enter the following:

```
.coverage;.coveragerc;.github;.htmlcov;.idea;.isort.cfg;.mypyrc;.mypy_cache;.pre-commit-config.yaml;.pylintrc;.pytest_cache;.readthedocs.yml;.tox;.toxrc;build;dist;docs/_build;out;poetry.lock;run;tools.ps1
```

Finally, go to the gear icon in the project panel, and uncheck **Show Excluded
Files**.  This will hide the files and directories that were excluded above.

#### IntelliJ

Right click on the `apologies` project in IntelliJ's project explorer and
choose **Open Module Settings**.  

Click on **Project**.  In the **Project SDK**, select the Python interpreter
virtualenv from above.  Then, under **Project compiler output**, enter `out`.  Then
click **Apply**.

Click on **Modules**.  On the **Sources** tab, find the `src` folder. Right
click on it and make sure the **Sources** entry is checked.  Without this,
IntelliJ sometimes does not recognize the source tree when trying to run
tests.

Still on the **Sources** tab, find the **Exclude files** box.  Enter the
following, and click **Apply**:

```
.coverage;.coveragerc;.github;.htmlcov;.idea;.isort.cfg;.mypyrc;.mypy_cache;.pre-commit-config.yaml;.pylintrc;.pytest_cache;.readthedocs.yml;.tox;.toxrc;build;dist;docs/_build;out;poetry.lock;run;tools.ps1
```

On the **Dependencies** tab, select the Python SDK you configured above as the
**Module SDK**, and click **OK**.

You should get a **Frameworks Detected** message again at this point.  If so,
click the **Configure** link and accept the defaults.

Finally, go to the gear icon in the project panel, and uncheck **Show Excluded
Files**.  This will hide the files and directories that were excluded above in
module configuration.

### Preferences

Unit tests are written using [Pytest](https://docs.pytest.org/en/latest/), 
and API documentation is written 
using [Google Style Python Docstring](https://sphinxcontrib-napoleon.readthedocs.io/en/latest/example_google.html).  However, neither of these is the default in IntelliJ or PyCharm.

In settings, go to **Tools > Python Integrated Tools**.  Under **Testing >
Default test runner**, select _pytest_.  Under **Docstrings > Docstring
format**, select _Google_. 

### Running Unit Tests

If you are using IntelliJ, first use **Build > Rebuild Project**, just to be
sure that everything is up-to-date.

In either IntelliJ or PyCharm, right click on the `tests` folder in the
project explorer and choose **Run 'pytest in tests'**.  Make sure that all of
the tests pass.

### External Tools

Optionally, you might want to set up external tools in IntelliJ or PyCharm for
some of common developer tasks: code reformatting and the PyLint and MyPy
checks.  One nice advantage of doing this is that you can configure an output
filter, which makes the Pylint and MyPy errors clickable in IntelliJ.  To set
up external tools, go to IntelliJ or PyCharm settings and find **Tools >
External Tools**.  Add the tools as described below.

#### Linux or MacOS

On Linux or MacOS, you can set up the external tools to invoke the `run` script
directly.

##### Format Code

|Field|Value|
|-----|-----|
|Name|`Format Code`|
|Description|`Run the Black and isort code formatters`|
|Group|`Developer Tools`|
|Program|`$ProjectFileDir$/run`|
|Arguments|`format`|
|Working directory|`$ProjectFileDir$`|
|Synchronize files after execution|_Checked_|
|Open console for tool outout|_Checked_|
|Make console active on message in stdout|_Unchecked_|
|Make console active on message in stderr|_Unchecked_|
|Output filters|_Empty_|

##### Run MyPy Checks

|Field|Value|
|-----|-----|
|Name|`Run MyPy Checks`|
|Description|`Run the MyPy code checks`|
|Group|`Developer Tools`|
|Program|`$ProjectFileDir$/run`|
|Arguments|`mypy`|
|Working directory|`$ProjectFileDir$`|
|Synchronize files after execution|_Unchecked_|
|Open console for tool outout|_Checked_|
|Make console active on message in stdout|_Checked_|
|Make console active on message in stderr|_Checked_|
|Output filters|`$FILE_PATH$:$LINE$:$COLUMN$:.*`|

##### Run Pylint Checks

|Field|Value|
|-----|-----|
|Name|`Run Pylint Checks`|
|Description|`Run the Pylint code checks`|
|Group|`Developer Tools`|
|Program|`$ProjectFileDir$/run`|
|Arguments|`pylint`|
|Working directory|`$ProjectFileDir$`|
|Synchronize files after execution|_Unchecked_|
|Open console for tool outout|_Checked_|
|Make console active on message in stdout|_Checked_|
|Make console active on message in stderr|_Checked_|
|Output filters|`$FILE_PATH$:$LINE$:$COLUMN.*`|

#### Windows

On Windows, PyCharm and IntelliJ have problems invoking the `run` script,
even via the Git Bash interpreter.  I have created a Powershell script
`tools.ps1` that can be used instead.

##### Format Code

|Field|Value|
|-----|-----|
|Name|`Format Code`|
|Description|`Run the Black and isort code formatters`|
|Group|`Developer Tools`|
|Program|`powershell.exe`|
|Arguments|`-executionpolicy bypass -File tools.ps1 format`|
|Working directory|`$ProjectFileDir$`|
|Synchronize files after execution|_Checked_|
|Open console for tool outout|_Checked_|
|Make console active on message in stdout|_Unchecked_|
|Make console active on message in stderr|_Unchecked_|
|Output filters|_Empty_|

##### Run MyPy Checks

|Field|Value|
|-----|-----|
|Name|`Run MyPy Checks`|
|Description|`Run the MyPy code checks`|
|Group|`Developer Tools`|
|Program|`powershell.exe`|
|Arguments|`-executionpolicy bypass -File tools.ps1 mypy`|
|Working directory|`$ProjectFileDir$`|
|Synchronize files after execution|_Unchecked_|
|Open console for tool outout|_Checked_|
|Make console active on message in stdout|_Checked_|
|Make console active on message in stderr|_Checked_|
|Output filters|`$FILE_PATH$:$LINE$:$COLUMN$:.*`|

##### Run Pylint Checks

|Field|Value|
|-----|-----|
|Name|`Run Pylint Checks`|
|Description|`Run the Pylint code checks`|
|Group|`Developer Tools`|
|Program|`powershell.exe`|
|Arguments|`-executionpolicy bypass -File tools.ps1 pylint`|
|Working directory|`$ProjectFileDir$`|
|Synchronize files after execution|_Unchecked_|
|Open console for tool outout|_Checked_|
|Make console active on message in stdout|_Checked_|
|Make console active on message in stderr|_Checked_|
|Output filters|`$FILE_PATH$:$LINE$:$COLUMN.*`|

## Running the Demo

While this is primarily a library, it includes a quick'n'dirty console demo
that plays a game with 2-4 automated players.  This demo works only on
UNIX-like platforms that support the curses library.  Here's the help output:

```
$ poetry run demo
usage: demo [-h] [--players PLAYERS] [--mode {STANDARD,ADULT}]
            [--source SOURCE] [--delay DELAY]

Run a game with simulated players, displaying output on the terminal.

optional arguments:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  --players PLAYERS     Number of simulated players in the game
  --mode {STANDARD,ADULT}
                        Choose the game mode
  --source SOURCE       Fully-qualified name of the character source
  --delay DELAY         Delay between computer-generated moves (fractional
                        seconds)

By default, the game runs in STANDARD mode with 4 players. A source is a class
that chooses a player's move.
```

It's simplest to run a demo with the default arguments:

```
$ run demo
```

This runs a really fast game in adult mode with 3 players:

```
$ run demo --players=3 --mode=ADULT --delay=0.1
```

> _Note:_ The demo only works inside a UNIX-style terminal window (like an
> xterm or a MacOS terminal).  Some terminals (like [iTerm2](https://www.iterm2.com/)) may
> require extra configuration before the terminal can be resized properly
> (see [StackExchange](https://apple.stackexchange.com/a/47841/249172Z)).

## Release Process

### Documentation

Documentation at [Read the Docs](https://apologies.readthedocs.io/en/stable/)
is generated via a GitHub hook each time code is pushed to master.  So, there
is no formal release process for the documentation.

### Code

Code is released to [PyPI](https://pypi.org/project/apologies/).  There is a
partially-automated process to publish a new release.  

> _Note:_ In order to publish code, you must must have push permissions to the
> GitHub repo and be a collaborator on the PyPI project.  Before running this
> process for the first time, you must set up a PyPI API token and configure
> Poetry to use it.  (See notes below.)

Ensure that you are on the `master` branch.  Releases must always be done from
`master`.

Ensure that the `Changelog` is up-to-date and reflects all of the changes that
will be published.  The top line must show your version as unreleased:

```
Version 0.1.29     unreleased
```

Run the release step:

```
$ run release 0.1.29
```

This updates `pyproject.toml` and the `Changelog` to reflect the released
version, then commits those changes and tags the code.  Nothing has been pushed
or published yet, so you can always remove the tag (i.e. `git tag -d v0.1.29`)
and revert your commit (`git reset HEAD~1`) if you made a mistake.

Finally, publish the release:

```
$ run publish
```

This builds the deployment artifacts, publishes the artifacts to PyPI, and
pushes the repo to GitHub.  The code will be available on PyPI for others to
use after a little while, sometimes within a minute or two, and sometimes as
much as half an hour later.

### Configuring the PyPI API Token

First, in your PyPI [account settings](https://pypi.org/manage/account/),
create an API token with upload permissions for the apologies project.

Once you have the token, you will configure Poetry to use it.  Poetry relies on
the Python keyring to store this secret.  On MacOS, it will use the system
keyring, and no other setup is required.  

On Debian, the process is more complicated (see the the [keyring documentation](https://pypi.org/project/keyring/) for more details).  

First, install a keyring manager, and then log out:

```
$ sudo apt-get install gnome-keyring
$ exit
```

Log back in and initialize your keyring by setting and then removing a dummy
value:

```
$ keyring set testvalue "user"
Password for 'user' in 'testvalue': 
Please enter password for encrypted keyring: 

$ keyring get testvalue "user"
Please enter password for encrypted keyring: 
password

$ keyring del testvalue "user"
Deleting password for 'user' in 'testvalue':
```

At this point, the keyring should be fully functional.

Now, configure Poetry following the [instructions](https://python-poetry.org/docs/repositories/#configuring-credentials):

```
poetry config pypi-token.pypi <the PyPI token>
```

You will have to type in the same keyring password that you set above.  Note
that this leaves your actual secret in the command-line history, so make sure
to scrub it once you're done.

> _Note:_ The user experience is frankly terrible if you're trying to work on a
> simple SSH session outside of a Linux desktop.  The GNOME keyring manager
> wants to pop up its dialog to accept your credentials to unlock the keyring.
> That won't work on an SSH session where there is no GUI.  One alternative is
> to follow the notes in the [keyring documentation](https://pypi.org/project/keyring/) under
> **Using Keyring on headless Linux systems**.  This gives you a way to unlock
> the keyring inside a DBUS session. 
>
> The documented process does work, but it's slow and clunky.  And _you must
> keep the DBUS session open in a separate terminal window for as long as you
> need to use the keyring_.  When the instructions say "enter your password and
> type CTRL-D", they mean that literally.  Don't press Enter first or anything
> like that.  I've found that it works best if I enter the password and press
> CTRL-D twice so I get back to the DBUS `$` prompt before proceeding in
> another window.
